Add Java 21 upgrade instructions (#8046)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/doc/book/platform-information/upgrade-java-to-21.adoc

---
layout: subsection
title: Upgrade to Java 21
---

When upgrading the JVM used to run Jenkins from Java 17 to Java 21, there are some details you should know and precautions you should take.

> Java 21 is supported as of LTS 2.426.1 and Jenkins Weekly 2.419.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: Java 21 is supported as of LTS 2.426.1 and Jenkins Weekly 2.419.
```

== Back up Jenkins

As with any upgrade, we recommend:

. link:https:/doc/book/system-administration/backing-up/#jenkins_home[Backing up `JENKINS_HOME`].
. Testing the upgrade with your backup.

> . Only after all required tests pass, performing the upgrade on your production controller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. After all required tests pass, execute the upgrade on your production controller.
```

=== Upgrade the Jenkins Java version to Java 21

.Upgrading Jenkins Java Version From 17 to 21
video::8xQVGpWeIe0[youtube,width=800,height=420]

To verify the Java version currently used in your controller:

. Navigate to *Manage Jenkins* and then select *System Information* in the *Status Information* section.

> . While on the *System Properties* tab, locate the `java.runtime.version` and reveal the hidden value to display your current Java version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. On the *System Properties* tab, locate the `java.runtime.version` and reveal the hidden value to display your current Java version.
```

To verify the Java version currently used in your agent:

. Select an agent name from the *Build Executor Status* widget and then select *System Information*
. Locate the `java.runtime.version` and reveal the hidden value to display the current Java version.

The `checkNodes` script determines what version of Java is running the controller process, along with the version of the agent that's associated with that controller.
The script then checks the version of Java that is on the agent.
When these values are returned, `OK` means that the agent Java version matches the controller Java version.
Otherwise, the result displays the expected Java version and the version found instead.

> To run the `checkNodes` script:

Reviewer: In the rendered view, this intro sentence for the following steps appears at the end of the paragraph. I would move it to the next line so that it is its own separate line.

def expectedJavaVersion = System.getProperty("java.version")
println "Master"
println " Expected Agent Version = '${expectedAgentVersion}'"
println " Expected Java Version = '${expectedJavaVersion}'"
Jenkins.instance.getComputers()
        .findAll { it instanceof SlaveComputer }
        .each { computer ->
    println "Node '${computer.name}'"
    if (!computer.getChannel()) {
        println " is disconnected."
    } else {
        def isOk = true
        def agentVersion = computer.getSlaveVersion()
        if (!expectedAgentVersion.equals(agentVersion)) {
            println " expected agent version '${expectedAgentVersion}' but got '${agentVersion}'"
            isOk = false
        }
        def javaVersion = computer.getSystemProperties().get("java.version")
        if (!expectedJavaVersion.equals(javaVersion)) {
            println " expected java version '${expectedJavaVersion}' but got '${javaVersion}'"
            isOk = false
        }

        if(isOk) {
            println " OK"
        }
    }
}
return;
----

=== Upgrade to Java 21 on your Jenkins controller

The following steps are taken from the video linked at the top of this page.

> . Stop the Jenkins controller using `systemctl stop jenkins`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Stop the Jenkins controller by using `systemctl stop jenkins`.
```

> . Stop the Jenkins controller using `systemctl stop jenkins`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Stop the Jenkins controller with `systemctl stop jenkins`.
```

. Install the corresponding Java version with `dnf -y install temurin-21-jdk`.
. Check the Java version with `java -version`.

> . Change the default Java for the system using `update-alternatives --config java` and then enter `2` to select Java 21.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Change the default Java for the system by using `update-alternatives --config java` and then enter `2` to select Java 21.
```

> . Change the default Java for the system using `update-alternatives --config java` and then enter `2` to select Java 21.
> . Restart Jenkins using `systemctl restart jenkins`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Change the default Java for the system with `update-alternatives --config java` and then enter `2` to select Java 21.
. Restart Jenkins with `systemctl restart jenkins`.
```

=== Upgrade Jenkins

> If you need to upgrade Jenkins, as well as the JVM, we recommend you:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To upgrade Jenkins, as well as the JVM, we recommend you:
```

. link:/doc/book/system-administration/backing-up/#jenkins_home[Back up `JENKINS_HOME`].
. Stop the Jenkins controller.
. Upgrade the JVM on which Jenkins is running.
** Use a package manager to install the new JVM.
** Ensure the default JVM is the newly installed version.
*** If it is not, run `systemctl edit jenkins`, and set either the `JAVA_HOME` environment variable or the `JENKINS_JAVA_CMD` environment variable.
. Upgrade Jenkins to the most recent version.
** How you upgrade Jenkins is dependent upon your original Jenkins installation method.
+
TIP: We recommend that you use the package manager of your system (such as `apt` or `yum`).
. Validate the upgrade to confirm that all plugins and jobs are loaded.
. Upgrade the required plugins.

When upgrading the Java version for Jenkins and the JVM, it is important to upgrade all plugins that support Java 21.
Plugin upgrades assure compatibility with the most recent Jenkins releases.

NOTE: If you discover a previously unreported issue, please let us know.
Refer to link:/participate/report-issue/#issue-reporting[our issue reporting documentation] for guidance.

=== JVM version on agents

> All agents must be running on the same JVM version as the controller, due to how controllers and agents communicate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to how controllers and agents communicate, all agents must run on the same JVM version as the controller.
```

If you're upgrading your Jenkins controller to run on Java 21, you must upgrade the JVM on your agents.

Validating the version of each agent can be done with the plugin:versioncolumn[Versions Node Monitors] plugin.
This plugin provides information about the JVM version of each agent on the node management screen of your Jenkins controller.

> This plugin can also be configured to automatically disconnect any agent with an incorrect JVM version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can configure this plugin to automatically disconnect any agent with an incorrect JVM version.
```

=== Upgrade the Jenkins Java version to Java 21

.Upgrading Jenkins Java Version From 17 to 21
video::8xQVGpWeIe0[youtube,width=800,height=420]

To verify the Java version currently used in your controller:

. Navigate to *Manage Jenkins* and then select *System Information* in the *Status Information* section.
. On the *System Properties* tab, locate the `java.runtime.version` and reveal the hidden value to display your current Java version.

To verify the Java version currently used in your agent:

. Select an agent name from the *Build Executor Status* widget and then select *System Information*.
. Locate the `java.runtime.version` and reveal the hidden value to display the current Java version.

The `checkNodes` script determines what version of Java is running the controller process, along with the version of the agent that's associated with that controller.
The script then checks the version of Java that is on the agent.
When these values are returned, `OK` means that the agent Java version matches the controller Java version.
Otherwise, the result displays the expected Java version and the version found instead.

> 7To run the `checkNodes` script:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To run the `checkNodes` script:
```

Author: Those darn cats are trying to sabotage me.

println "Master"
println " Expected Agent Version = '${expectedAgentVersion}'"
println " Expected Java Version = '${expectedJavaVersion}'"
Jenkins.instance.getComputers()
        .findAll { it instanceof SlaveComputer }
        .each { computer ->
    println "Node '${computer.name}'"
    if (!computer.getChannel()) {
        println " is disconnected."
    } else {
        def isOk = true
        def agentVersion = computer.getSlaveVersion()
        if (!expectedAgentVersion.equals(agentVersion)) {
            println " expected agent version '${expectedAgentVersion}' but got '${agentVersion}'"
            isOk = false
        }
        def javaVersion = computer.getSystemProperties().get("java.version")
        if (!expectedJavaVersion.equals(javaVersion)) {
            println " expected java version '${expectedJavaVersion}' but got '${javaVersion}'"
            isOk = false
        }

        if(isOk) {
            println " OK"
        }
    }
}
return;
----

=== Upgrade to Java 21 on your Jenkins controller

The following steps are taken from the video linked at the top of this page.

. Stop the Jenkins controller with `systemctl stop jenkins`.

> . Install the corresponding Java version with `dnf -y install temurin-21-jdk`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Install the corresponding Java version with `dnf -y install temurin-21-jdk` or with the package manager your system uses.
```

. Check the Java version with `java -version`.

> . Change the default Java for the system with `update-alternatives --config java` and then enter `2` to select Java 21.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Change the default Java for the system by running `update-alternatives --config java` and then enter the number that corresponds to Java 21 (e.g., `2` if that's the correct option).```
